# Gluconeogenesis

Gluconeogenesis is a metabolic pathway that allows the liver and kidneys to produce glucose from lactate, glycerol, glutamine and alanine. This pathway assumes special significance as the only source of glucose when no new glucose is arriving in the body via food and the glycogen store in the liver has been exhausted.

Normally, gluconeogenesis occurs when the insulin level is low (i.e. in the post-absorptive state). However, diabetic people may experience high gluconeogenesis flux even in the post-prandial state when the insulin level is high.

In CarbMetSim, the Liver and the Kidneys produce glucose via gluconeogenesis at configurable average rates (gngLiver and gngKidneys respectively, 0.16 mg/kg/minute each by default) using substrates mentioned above. When the insulinLevel is above the baseInsulinLevel (i.e. the BGL is more than the baseGlucoseLevel), the average gluconeogenesis flux is multiplied by a factor (between 0 and 1) that decreases in value with increase in the insulinLevel as per an inverse sigmoid function (currently, the complementary CDF of a normal distribution with a configurable mean and standard deviation). This allows us to model the decrease in gluconeogenesis flux with increase in the insulin level. On the other hand, if the insulinLevel is below the baseInsulinLevel (i.e. the BGL is below the baseGlucoseLevel), the average gluconeogenesis flux is multiplied by a factor that decreases in value from a configurable maximum (gngImpact >= 1, by default 6.0) to the minimum value 1 as the insulinLevel increases from zero to the baseInsulinLevel. This allows us to model the increased gluconeogenesis flux when BGL is low and gluconeogenesis is probably the only source of glucose for the body. The simulator currently assumes that the substrates are always available in sufficient quantity to allow gluconeogenesis to take place in the manner described above.